Write the color and the exact number for each of the four unknowns.

Unknown #1
Unknown #2
Unknown #3
Unknown #4
Color
yellow
orange
dark purple
green
Number
46
217
303
441

Please write concise answers to each of the following:

What trend should have emerged as you placed your squares in order of atomic mass the same way Mendeleev did?  How did you respond to this trend to create an organizational scheme?

Initially, a trend that emerged as the squares were placed in a single row, in order of atomic mass, was the fact that there was a similar color, representing a shared set of properties of an element, every few squares. In addition, there was a pattern among every few sets of elements grouped together, that their mass numbers incremented by a certain amount. As a result, we organized the table in a way such that the atomic mass ascended as one move across the rows, and that each column held all the elements of the same color. In addition, each row, or period, of the table was established in such a way that all elements that had increasing mass numbers by the same increment were grouped together.


Do trends vary more within groups or within periods? Assuming that colors represent collective properties of each “element” square, relate your answer to the real periodic table.

Trends vary more among periods of the periodic table. This is because among the groups, the color remains constant, with few discernible trends among the elements within each group. Within each row, or period, there are several noticeable trends about the elements that vary more, such as the fact that each period holds one of each colored element. In addition, the increment between each element’s atomic mass also varies from period to period. For example, within the first period, each element’s atomic mass increments by two units from the next element, and within the fourth period, each element’s atomic mass increments by twelve units. Similarly, the periods within the real periodic table have trends that vary more. For example, each group has one primary trend, being that each group contains elements with the same number of valence electrons. Within each period of the real periodic table, trends such as increase in atomic mass, decrease in atomic radius, and the main energy level can be observed.

How did you determine the color and atomic “mass” of your unknown elements?

Based on trends within the group that each unknown element was supposed to be a part of, such as the fact that each element within the group was the same color, we were able to predict that the unknown element was also of the same color. For example, the first unknown element was placed in the group which contained all of the yellow-colored elements. As a result, we predicted that the unknown element would be yellow as well. In addition, based on trends within the periods, we were able to predict the atomic mass of each of the unknown elements. There was a noticeable trend that each of the atomic mass numbers was incrementing by a different amount among elements of different periods. For example, in the first period, the atomic mass numbers of each of the elements was incrementing by two units from the previous element. As a result, we were able to predict that the atomic mass of the fourth unknown element had a mass of 441 units, as there was a noticeable trend of the atomic mass incrementing by thirty units between elements of that specific period.
