"A Rape on Campus" is a now-retracted Rolling Stone magazine article, written by Sabrina Erdely and originally published on November 19, 2014, that describes a purported group sexual assault at the University of Virginia (UVA). Rolling Stone retracted the story in its entirety on April 5, 2015.
The article included a claim that a UVA student, identified only as "Jackie" by the magazine, had been taken to a party hosted by the Phi Kappa Psi fraternity at UVA by a fellow student. At the party, Jackie alleged in the article, her date led her to a bedroom where she was raped by several fraternity members as part of an initiation rite.
Jackie's account generated much media attention, and UVA suspended the fraternity. After other journalists investigated the article's claims and found significant discrepancies, Rolling Stone issued multiple apologies for the story. Further investigation concluded that Jackie had fabricated the incident. According to multiple media, Jackie may have invented the gang rape story in an unsuccessful attempt to win the affections of a fellow student that she had a crush on.
On January 12, 2015, Charlottesville Police Department officials told UVA that an investigation had failed to find any evidence confirming the events in the Rolling Stone article. On January 30, 2015, UVA President Teresa Sullivan acknowledged that the Rolling Stone story was discredited. Charlottesville Police officially suspended their four-month investigation on March 23, 2015, based on lack of credible evidence. At the request of Rolling Stone publisher Jann S. Wenner, the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism agreed to audit the editorial processes that led to the publication of the story. On April 5, 2015, Rolling Stone retracted the article and published the independent report on the publication's history. UVA associate dean Nicole Eramo, the Phi Kappa Psi fraternity, and several fraternity members have since filed lawsuits against Erdely and Rolling Stone.
In light of the findings, Erik Wemple of The Washington Post pronounced the story "a complete crock". In the Columbia Journalism Review, Bill Grueskin called the story "a mess—thinly sourced, full of erroneous assumptions, and plagued by gaping holes in the reporting." The Columbia Journalism Review called the story "this year's media-fail sweepstakes" and the Poynter Institute named it as the "Error of the Year" in journalism.