Advertising Age (or Ad Age) is a magazine, delivering news, analysis, and data on marketing and media. The magazine was started as a broadsheet newspaper in Chicago in 1930. Today, its content appears in a print weekly distributed around the world and on many electronic platforms, including: adage.com, daily e-mail newsletters called Ad Age Daily, Ad Age's Mediaworks and Ad Age Digital; weekly newsletters such as Madison & Vine (about branded entertainment) and Ad Age China; podcasts called Why It Matters and various videos. It also features a bookstore and blogs, some created by the publication's editorial team, others, such as Small Agency Diary created by members of the Ad Age community. Simon Dumenco, the "Media Guy", is one of its columnists.
Ad Age's parent company also publishes Creativity, about the creative process, which has its own website, www.creativity-online.com, featuring what its editors believe to be the best video, print, and interactive ads. The site www.adcritic.com was acquired by The Ad Age Group in March 2002, and www.creativity-online.com is still reached by that domain.
The editorial component of Ad Age is based in New York City. Its parent company, Detroit-based Crain Communications, is a privately held publishing company with more than 30 magazines, including Autoweek, Creativity, Crain's New York Business, Crain's Chicago Business, Crain's Detroit Business, and Automotive News. The corporate and circulation component of "Autoweek", as with all of the Crain publications, is based at Crain's headquarters in downtown Detroit.
In 1999, Advertising Age published a list of the top 100 players in advertising history. Among these were Alvin Achenbaum, Bill Backer, Marion Harper Jr., Mary Wells Lawrence, ACNielson, David Ogilvy, and J. Walter Thompson. In 1980, Henderson Advertising, founded by James M. Henderson in Greenville, South Carolina, became the first agency outside New York or Chicago to be named "Advertising Agency of the Year" by Advertising Age.
An industry trade magazine, BtoB, was folded into Ad Age in January 1, 2014.