Bad is the seventh studio album by American singer and songwriter Michael Jackson, released on August 31, 1987 in the United States by Epic Records and internationally by CBS Records. It was released nearly five years after Jackson's previous solo studio album, Thriller (1982). Bad was recorded during the first half of 1987. The lyrical themes include media bias, paranoia, racial profiling, romance, self-improvement and world peace. The album cemented Jackson's status as one of the most successful artists of the 1980s.
Bad saw Jackson exercise even more artistic freedom than he did with his two previous Epic releases (Off the Wall and Thriller); Jackson composed nine of the album's eleven tracks, and received co-producer credit for the entire album. Nine of the eleven songs on Bad were released as singles; one was a promotional single, and another was released outside of the United States and Canada. Five of the singles hit No. 1 in the United States, while a sixth charted within the top ten, and a seventh charted within the top twenty on the Hot 100. Bad peaked at No. 1 in thirteen countries and charted within the top twenty in other territories. The only songs on the album which were not released as a single were "Speed Demon" and "Just Good Friends", the latter being the only song on the album to also not have a music video accompanying it.
The album continued Jackson's commercial success in the late 1980s, and garnered six Grammy Award nominations, winning two. Aside from commercial success, the album was well received by contemporary critics. The album produced a record five Billboard Hot 100 number one singles. Bad was ranked No. 43 in the 100 Greatest Albums of All Time of the MTV Generation in 2009 by VH1 and number 202 in Rolling Stone magazine's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. Bad had reportedly sold between 30 and 35 million copies worldwide and has been cited as one of the 30 best-selling albums of all time. In 2017, the album was certified Diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America, denoting sales of over ten million copies in the United States. The album marked the final collaboration between Jackson and producer Quincy Jones.