Electronic dance music (also known as EDM, dance music, club music, or simply dance) is a broad range of percussive electronic music genres made largely for nightclubs, raves, and festivals. EDM is generally produced for playback by disc jockeys (DJs) who create seamless selections of tracks, called a mix, by segueing from one recording to another. EDM producers also perform their music live in a concert or festival setting in what is sometimes called a live PA. In the United Kingdom and in continental Europe, EDM is more commonly called 'dance music' or simply 'dance'.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, following the emergence of raving, pirate radio, and an upsurge of interest in club culture, EDM acquired mainstream popularity in Europe. During the mid to late 1990s, despite the initial success of a number of dance acts in the United States, acceptance of dance culture was not universal, and mainstream media outlets remained hostile to its music. At this time, a perceived association between EDM and drug culture led governments at state and city level to enact laws and policies intended to halt the spread of rave culture.
By the early 2010s, the term "electronic dance music" and the initialism "EDM" was being pushed by the United States music industry and music press in an effort to rebrand American rave culture. Despite the industry's attempt to create a specific EDM brand, the initialism remains in use as an umbrella term for multiple genres, including house, techno, trance, drum and bass, dubstep, and their respective subgenres.
Pioneers of electronic music and early EDM
Robert Arthur "Bob" Moog (/ˈmoʊɡ/ MOHG; May 23, 1934 – August 21, 2005), founder of Moog Music, was an American engineer and pioneer of electronic music, best known as the inventor of the Moog synthesizer. Early examples of electronic dance music  the disco music of Giorgio Moroder in the late 1970s, and the electronic music of Kraftwerk and Yellow Magic Orchestra in the late 1970s. Think of early electronic music and you’ll probably picture the disco anthems of the late 1970s and early 1980s. Although electronic music didn’t become popular until the mid 1970s, artists were using electronic instruments as early as the 1960s.
Progressive rock bands like Pink Floyd made the iconic Moog synthesizer one of the most important aspects of their sound. Pop rock bands like The Beatles also began to incorporate keyboards and synthesizers into some of their experimental songs.
At the same time, composers were using new instruments like the Theremin in their work, particularly in the film industry. The commercial Moog synthesizer, released in the mid-1960s, is regarded as the first iconic instrument of electronic music.