In Search of The is a set of thirteen albums by Buckethead, released on February 21, 2007. Each was initially personally numbered and monogrammed by Buckethead himself. No two sets were the same, as the covers were hand-drawn and unique from one another. It is considered a special release, making it the first of Buckethead's albums to be referred to as such.
According to Travis Dickerson:
The original project started as an even more ambitious project than the one released. Dickerson explained that the project consisted of a series of 13-CD box sets that when completed and stacked would spell out the phrase "In Search Of The Disembodied Sounds". However, due to the popular demand of this section of the project, the original idea was scrapped, as it became an exhausting endeavor to cover the demand for this boxset.  The original box set could be purchased as either a box set or separately. There seems to be no underlying theme or thread to the songs on the separate discs, and they feature many different and diverse styles of music. In addition, each song stands alone; none of the tracks fade into each other. The set also lacks any type of track listing as all the songs are untitled, however, unofficial track names have been assigned by fans of Buckethead which are known to reflect his personality and his previous work.  As such, references to past material are present. There are a total of 92 songs in the set ranging in lengths from 0:33 to 19:45, not including "Vol. 13: E" which is one unbroken 45-minute track.
Buckethead drew the covers on each set of In Search of The until he reached the 1000th copy.  However, mistakes were made in the numbering, and whole stretches of numbers were skipped during the production of the personalized edition of the box set. Dickerson estimates that the actual number of box sets produced might be around 800 copies with the final number written being 1000.  All further copies available are no longer hand-made and feature the same artwork from set to set.
There are no credits to the set's name, so it is likely that all of the music on the set was performed solely by Buckethead; however, this has not yet been confirmed.