The J Award is an award given by influential Australian youth radio station Triple J to Australian Album of the Year. It is judged by the music and on-air teams at triple j, Unearthed and Double J. The award was inaugurated in 2005, to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the station's establishment.
To be eligible for entry in a particular year, an album must be released (either independently or through a record label) between December the previous year to November that year. All albums sent to triple j for airplay consideration will also be automatically considered for the award. Nominations are chosen by triple j management and are released throughout the year. Nominations tend towards artists releasing breakthrough albums rather than already well-established musicians.
A second category was introduced to triple j's annual J Award in 2007, with the triple j judges now looking back over the winners of site competitions over the year and awarding the triple j Unearthed Artist of the Year J Award to the best and most promising artist. Yet another category, "Music Video of The Year," was added in 2008 with Triple j tv selecting one music video from a list of approximately five nominations to be the best Australian music video. It is now presented in collaboration with long-running ABC music video programme rage. In 2014 it was announced that a fourth category, "Double J Australian Artist Of The Year" would be added to the award list. It was awarded by Double J, triple j's sister station, to the artist that the station had seen as the greatest contributor to either recorded music, live performances or Australian music culture, or a combination of the three, during the course of the year. Mia Dyson was the inaugural winner.
The announcement of the J Award winner will come each year at the culmination of Ausmusic Month, when triple j celebrates Australian music throughout November.
Tame Impala is the only band to have won more than one J Award, they won the J Award for Australian Album of the Year in 2010 & 2012.