Jakarta /dʒəˈkɑːrtə/, (formerly named Sunda Kelapa, Jayakarta and Batavia) officially the Special Capital Region of Jakarta, is the capital and most populous city of the Republic of Indonesia.
Located on the northwest coast of the world's most populous island of Java, Jakarta is the country's economic, cultural and political centre, with a population of 10,075,310 as of 2014. The official metropolitan area, known as Jabodetabek (a name formed by combining the initial syllables of Jakarta, Bogor, Depok, Tangerang and Bekasi), is the second largest in the world, yet the metropolis' suburbs still continue beyond it. Its unofficial built-up (metropolitan) area covers Bogor, Tangerang, Bekasi, Karawang, Serang, Purwakarta, Sukabumi and Subang regencies (123 districts), also including Tangerang, Bekasi, Tangerang Selatan, Depok, Serang and Cilegon Municipalities, which in total were home to 30,214,303 inhabitants as of 2010 census.
Established in the fourth century, the city became an important trading port for the Kingdom of Sunda. It was the de facto capital of the Dutch East Indies (known as Batavia at that time). Today, the city has continued as the capital of Indonesia since the country's independence was declared in 1945. The city is currently the seat of the ASEAN Secretariat as well as important financial institutions such as the Bank of Indonesia, the Indonesia Stock Exchange, and the corporate headquarters of numerous Indonesian companies and multinational corporations. Jakarta's business opportunities, as well as its potential to offer a higher standard of living, attract migrants from all over Indonesia, making the city a melting pot of many communities and cultures.
Jakarta is listed as an alpha-global city in the 2012 Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network (GaWC) research. Based on the global metro monitor by the Brookings Institution, in 2014, economic growth in Jakarta ranked 34th among the world's 200 largest cities. Jakarta has grown more rapidly than Kuala Lumpur, Beijing, and Bangkok.

