Led Zeppelin is a box set compilation of songs by the English rock band Led Zeppelin, released on 7 September 1990 on Atlantic Records, digitally remastered on four compact discs, six vinyl records, or four cassette tapes. The first compilation album released by Led Zeppelin, selection and remastering of the tracks were supervised by Jimmy Page and took place in New York during early to mid-1990. A 36-page booklet was also included with the release.
This set contains two previously unreleased tracks and one new mix. "Travelling Riverside Blues" was recorded on 24 June 1969 at the BBC Maida Vale Studio. "White Summer/Black Mountain Side" was recorded at the Playhouse Theatre, London on 27 June 1969. The "Moby Dick/Bonzo's Montreux" mix took place at the Atlantic Synclavier Suite in New York, in May 1990. It also includes the band's only non-album B-side, "Hey, Hey, What Can I Do" of the 1970 single "Immigrant Song", previously unavailable on compact disc.
To differentiate this box set from a set of selections taken from it, the Remasters box set released the following month, in some markets this release is listed under the title The Complete Collection. To further the confusion, in both cases this is different from The Complete Studio Recordings box set released three years later, which includes all nine of the band's studio albums on ten discs, with the three extra tracks appended to Coda, along with the 1969 recording "Baby Come On Home", first released on the two-disc Led Zeppelin Boxed Set 2. The "Moby Dick/Bonzo's Montreux" mix is also included in the promotional interview album Profiled (1990). Also three years after this release, the remaining Led Zeppelin tracks not appearing on this box set were issued on Led Zeppelin Boxed Set 2.
In an interview he gave in January 2010, Page made reference to the boxed set:

Oh, I'm now fully aware of the mark Led Zeppelin made on the musical landscape. My awareness was re-heightened when we were remastering the material to do that CD box set in 1990. When you hear it all, song after song, you realise what a textbook it is for musicians who are coming along, and that's so great. The whole thing is about passing it on, because that's how it was done for me when I was learning from all those old blues and rockabilly records. It's all part of how this cultural phenomenon keeps moving on. I think everyone carries the flame on.