This list of Nobel laureates by university affiliation shows the university affiliations of winners of the Nobel Prize and the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences since 1901 (total 881 individual laureates). This list does not include organizations which were awarded the Nobel prize or any individuals in those organizations. Universities are listed in descending order according to the number of affiliates, while only the top 50 universities are shown explicitly with their ranking.
The university affiliations fall into three categories in this list: Graduate and Attendee (excluding honorary degrees and auditors), Long-term Academic Staff, and Short-term Academic Staff. The category of "Long-term Academic Staff" mostly consists of tenure/tenure-track and equivalent academic positions, while that of "Short-term Academic Staff" mostly consists of lecturers (without tenure), postdoctoral researchers, visiting professors/scholars, and equivalent academic positions. Some visiting professorships/lectureships such as the "Morris Loeb Lecturer", "Lee Historical Lecturer" and "Charles Eliot Norton Professor" in Harvard University are in fact awards/honors/recognition instead of an actual affiliation with the university (compared to the "Morris Loeb Long-term Lecturer"), and thus will not be counted in this list. Finally, giving lectures at a university is not an indication of affiliation with that university – the lecturer has to be officially employed (even with a "visiting" title) by the university to be counted.
The number following a person's name is the year he/she received the prize; in particular, a number with asterisk (*) means the person received the award while he/she was working at the institution containing that asterisk. A laureate with his/her name underlined implies that this person has already been counted for a same institution in previous category. If a person had multiple positions under one category, only the position with highest rank is considered.
Each institution practices different methods for counting affiliates, from generous counting to conservative. Within this list, the Official Counts are thus shown as comparison, which are published by the universities themselves. The federal University of London is counted by its individual constituent colleges in this table. The University of California is also counted here by its individual campuses. Finally, this list, together with List of Fields Medal winners by university affiliation and List of Turing Award laureates by university affiliation, presents the university affiliation (with similar criteria) of people who have won highest honors in fundamental academic disciplines.
Legend: [Ph.] Physics, [Ch.] Chemistry, [PM] Physiology or Medicine, [Li.] Literature, [Pe.] Peace, [Ec.] Economics.