The following list shows Fields Medal winners by university affiliations since 1936 (total 56 winners). It does not include affiliations with research institutes such as IAS and MSRI in USA, as well as IHES and CNRS in France. The university affiliations of Fields Medal winners fall into three categories in this list: Graduate and Attendee (excluding honorary degrees and auditors), Long-term Academic Staff, and Short-term Academic Staff. The category of "Long-term Academic Staff" mostly consists of tenure/tenure-track and equivalent academic positions, while that of "Short-term Academic Staff" mostly consists of lecturers (without tenure), postdoctoral researchers, visiting professors/scholars, and equivalent academic positions. Only those universities with at least 5 affiliations of medalists are shown explicitly with ranking.
The number following a person's name is the year he/she received the Fields Medal; in particular, a number with asterisk (*) means the person received the award while he/she was working at the institution containing that asterisk. A medalist with his/her name underlined implies that this person has been counted for a same institution in previous category. If a person had multiple positions under one category, only the position with highest rank is considered.
It is rather common for mathematicians to visit other institutions, and sometimes there is ambiguity in determining whether such a visit should be counted as an "affiliation". This list adopts a conservative/passive criterion in the sense that only when a visit is mentioned in a medalist's Curriculum Vita/reliable biography, or is entitled with an academic position by a university, can it be counted as an "affiliation". Furthermore, some visiting professorships such as the "Shiing-Shen Chern Visiting Professorship" in UC Berkeley are in fact awards/honors/recognition instead of an actual affiliation with the university, and thus will not be counted in this list. Finally, giving lectures at a university is not an indication of affiliation with that university – the lecturer has to be officially employed (even with a "visiting" title) by the university to be counted.
This list, together with List of Nobel laureates by university affiliation and List of Turing Award laureates by university affiliation, presents the university affiliation (with similar criteria) of people who have won highest honors in fundamental academic disciplines.