Muscle Shoals is the largest city in Colbert County, Alabama, United States. As of the 2010 census, the population of Muscle Shoals was 13,146. The estimated population in 2015 was 13,706.
Both the city and the Florence-Muscle Shoals Metropolitan Area (including four cities in Colbert and Lauderdale counties) are commonly called "the Shoals". Northwest Alabama Regional Airport serves the Shoals region, located in the northwest section of the state.
Due to its strategic location along the Tennessee River, Muscle Shoals played a key role in historic land disputes between Native Americans and Anglo-American settlers in the late 1700s and early 1800s. It was also the site of an attempted community development project by Henry Ford in 1922. Since the 1960s, the city has been known for music – developing the "Muscle Shoals Sound", as local recording studios (including FAME Studios in the late 1950s and Muscle Shoals Sound Studio in 1969) produced hit records that shaped the history of popular music. The original streets of Muscle Shoals were named after streets in Detroit, Michigan due to Henry Ford's influence in the area. Ford Motor Company operated a plant in the Listerhill community 3 miles east of Muscle Shoals for many years before closing in 1982. Just like Detroit, Woodward Avenue is the main road through the city. However, due to intense growth since the 1960's many road names now have nothing to do with Detroit. Henry Ford's inability to acquire land from the Tennessee Valley Authority foiled his desire to create a 75-mile Industrial Megalopolis from Decatur to the Tri-State border of Pickwick Lake. However, the Ford influence has made a tremendous impact on the city's current sidewalk system which provides its citizens the ability to walk safely in moderate traffic locations within the city. Each day on Avalon Avenue and adjoining neighborhoods you can see many walkers, joggers, bicyclists, and people walking their pets. The flat terrain of Muscle Shoals has helped it grow and become a wonderful place to work and live. Also, Muscle Shoals has the award winning Muscle Shoals School System. On May 19, 2017 at Grace Life Church of the Shoals (right across from Muscle Shoals High School) over $9 million worth of scholarships were announced for the graduating class.