The Musica of Rome is intensely active. The venues for live music include:
the Theater of the Opera: the theater was built in the 1880s in the building boom to expand the capital of the new nation state of Italy. The theater has seen the premieres of many famous works, including Tosca and Cavalleria rusticana. It has hosted memorable events such as Visconti's staging of The Marriage of Figaro. The theater has a permanent orchestra, choir and ballet company, and now boasts a multi-media historical archive.
the National Academy of Santa Cecilia: the academy was authorized by Pope Gregory XIII in 1566 and has remained one of the most prestigious musical organizations in the world—this, through all the political vicissitudes of centuries: capital of the Papal States, then invasion by Napoleon, then capital of the new Italy in 1871. The Santa Cecilia Orchestra is a permanent organization and over the years has found a home in various auditoriums in the city, the most recent move (2003) being to the premises of the Parco della Musica, a vast new auditorium complex (see below). The full orchestra and the Santa Cecilia chamber ensembles perform 200 concerts a year in Rome.
the Santa Cecilia music conservatory;
the Roman Philharmonic Academy (Accademia Filarmonica Romana): performs at the Teatro Olimpico and has—besides an active concert season—a long history of promoting music education and community and amateur music;
the Lazio Symphony orchestra, which performs in Rome as well as elsewhere in the province of Latium;
the Youth Symphony of Rome;
the new Parco della Musica (opened in 2002) is a gigantic musical complex featuring three large, separate auditoriums, located between the Olympic Village and Parioli Quarter of Rome. It hosts a constant stream of classical, popular, and jazz music, featuring national as well as international musicians and groups;
the Aula Magna of the Sapienza University sponsors an active musical season;
As well, the city of Rome has the National Museum of Musical Instruments, one of the finest such institutions in the world.
Rome is considered the jazz capital of Italy, with an average of 350 jazz concerts scheduled each month. The city also plays host to several jazz festivals each year, including the Roma Jazz Festival, Casa del Jazz Festival and the Villa Celimontana Jazz Festival.