The music of Australia has an extensive history made of music societies. Indigenous Australian music is a part of the unique heritage of a 40,000–60,000 year history which produced the iconic didgeridoo. Contemporary fusions of Indigenous and Western styles (exemplified in the works of No Fixed Address, Yothu Yindi, Christine Anu and Geoffrey Gurrumul Yunupingu) mark distinctly Australian contributions to world music. During its early western history, Australia was a collection of British colonies, and Australian folk music and bush ballads such as Waltzing Matilda were heavily influenced by Anglo-Celtic traditions, while classical forms were derived from those of Europe. Contemporary Australian music ranges across a broad spectrum with trends often concurrent with those of the US, the UK, and similar nations – notably in the Australian rock and Australian country music genres. Tastes have diversified along with post-World War II multicultural immigration to Australia.
Notable Australian musicians include: the opera singers Dame Nellie Melba and Dame Joan Sutherland; the bass baritone Peter Dawson, country music stars Slim Dusty (Australia's biggest selling domestic artist), Smoky Dawson and John Williamson; Vocal group "The Iguana" who had a couple of No "1" hits one of the most popular being "California My Way " written by Jimmy Webb. solo artists John Farnham, Olivia Newton-John (five No. 1 Hot 100 hits, like "You're the One That I Want"), Rick Price, Missy Higgins, Kylie Minogue, Natalie Imbruglia, Guy Sebastian, Dami Im, Delta Goodrem, Sia Furler, Cody Simpson, Jessica Mauboy, Havana Brown, Gotye (No. 1 U.S. Billboard Hot 100 hit with "Somebody That I Used to Know" ft. New Zealander Kimbra), Rick Springfield (No. 1 Hot 100 hit with "Jessie's Girl") and Tina Arena, pub rock band Cold Chisel, folk-rocker Paul Kelly; Dance groups The Avalanches and Cut Copy; jazz guitarist Tommy Emmanuel; pioneer rocker Johnny O'Keefe, global folk-rock band The Seekers, global rock and pop bands Men At Work (two No. 1 Hot 100 hits including "Down Under" in 1983), the EasyBeats, Air Supply (No. 1 Hot 100 hit with "The One That You Love"), Crowded House, AC/DC, INXS (No. 1 Hot 100 hit with "Need You Tonight"), Little River Band, Nick Cave And The Bad Seeds, Midnight Oil, Dragon, Silverchair, Youth Group, You Am I and Powderfinger; Pendulum, Pop Rock duo Savage Garden (two No. 1 Hot 100 hits including "Truly Madly Deeply" in 1998), pop punk band 5 Seconds of Summer, alternative music acts the John Butler Trio, Xavier Rudd, Jet, Wolfmother, Sick Puppies, Tame Impala and The Vines. Other popular artists and groups include The Veronicas, Sticky Fingers, the Choirboys, Chantoozies, Saint Jude, Cheetah, Marc Williams, Peter Andre, Goanna, Australian Crawl, Rose Tattoo, Colleen Hewett, Keith Urban, The Angels, Ted Mullry Gang, Courtney Barnett, Hush, Chocolate Starfish, the Mixtures, Helen Reddy, Diana Trask, Thundamentals, San Cisco, Empire Of The Sun, Hilltop Hoods and Iggy Azalea (No. 1 Hot 100 hit with "Fancy" in 2014).