Nana Mouskouri (Greek: Νάνα Μούσχουρη, pronounced [ˈnana ˈmusxuri]), born Iōánna Moúschouri (Greek: Ιωάννα Μούσχουρη [ioˈana ˈmusxuri]; October 13, 1934) is a Greek singer, considered to be one of the best-selling music artists in the world. During the lifespan of her music career she has released over 200 albums and singles in 10 different languages, including Greek, French, English, German, Dutch, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, Hebrew, Welsh, Mandarin Chinese and Corsican.
Nana Mouskouri became well-known throughout Europe for the song ‘’The White Rose of Athens’’, recorded first in German as ‘’Weiße Rosen aus Athen‘’. It became her first record to sell over one million copies. Later in 1963 she represented Luxembourg at the Eurovision Song Contest with the song ‘’À force de prier‘’. Her friendship with the composer Michel Legrand led to the recording by Nana of the theme song of the Oscar-nominated film - The Umbrellas of Cherbourg. From 1968 to 1976, she hosted her own TV show produced by BBC - ‘’Presenting Nana Mouskouri‘’. Her popularity as a multilingual television personality and distinctive image, owing to the unusual-for-the-time signature black-rimmed glasses, turned Nana Mouskouri into an international star.
‘’Je chante avec toi Liberté‘’, recorded in 1981, is perhaps her biggest hit to date, performed in at least five languages -  French: ‘’Je chante avec toi liberté‘’, English: ‘’Song for Liberty‘’, German: ‘’Lied der Freiheit‘’, Spanish: ‘’Libertad‘’ and Portuguese: ‘’Liberdade‘’. ‘’Only Love‘’, a song recorded in 1985, gained worldwide popularity along with its other versions: French: ‘’L'Amour en Héritage‘’, Italian: ‘’Come un'eredità‘’, Spanish: ‘’La dicha del amor‘’, and German: ‘’Aber die Liebe bleibt‘’.
Nana Mouskouri became a spokesperson for UNICEF in 1993 and was elected to the European Parliament as a Greek deputy from 1994 to 1999.
In 2015 she was awarded with the Echo Music Prize for Outstanding achievements by the German music association Deutsche Phono-Akademie.