New Order are an English rock band formed in 1980, currently comprising Bernard Sumner, Stephen Morris, Gillian Gilbert, Phil Cunningham and Tom Chapman. The band was formed in 1980 by Sumner, Morris, and Peter Hook, who were the remaining members of post-punk group Joy Division following the suicide of vocalist Ian Curtis. They added Gilbert (keyboards and guitars) later that year.
By combining post-punk with an increasing influence from electronic and dance music, New Order became one of the most critically acclaimed and influential bands of the 1980s. Though the band's early years were shadowed by the legacy of Joy Division, their experience of the early 1980s New York City club scene saw them incorporate elements of dance rhythms and instrumentation into their work. The band's 1983 hit "Blue Monday", the best-selling 12-inch single of all time, is one example of how their sound became increasingly uptempo and electronic.
New Order were the flagship band for Manchester-based independent record label Factory Records. Their sometimes unlabelled album sleeves and "non-image" (the band rarely gave interviews and were known for performing short concert sets with no encores) reflected the label's aesthetic of doing whatever the relevant parties wanted to do, including an aversion to including singles as album tracks until 1984. Throughout their career, the band's records were art-directed by designer Peter Saville.
The group disbanded in 1993 to work on individual projects, and reunited in 1998. In 2001, Cunningham (guitars, keyboards and synthesisers) replaced Gilbert, who took a sabbatical from the band because of family commitments. In 2007, Hook left the band over personal conflicts. After Hook's departure, Sumner, Cunningham, and Morris worked on Bad Lieutenant and the band reunited in 2011 without Hook, with Gilbert returning and Chapman replacing Hook on bass. The band members have been involved in several solo projects, such as Sumner's Electronic and Bad Lieutenant; Hook's Monaco and Revenge and Gilbert and Morris' The Other Two.
In September 2015, the band released their tenth studio album, Music Complete.