The Order of Prince Danilo I of Montenegro (Montenegrin: Орден Књаза Данила I, Orden Knjaza Danila I) was an order of the Principality, and later Kingdom, of Montenegro. It is currently granted as a dynastic honor by the undisputed head of the House of Petrović-Njegoš, Nicholas Petrović Njegoš II. Although no longer a state order, recognition is indicated by the acceptance of the former President of Montenegro, Filip Vujanović,. More formal recognition by the Republic of Montenegro, is implicit in the 2011 "Law on the Status of the Descendants of the Petrović Njegoš Dynasty" which Recognizes the current crown prince as head of the Royal Family and specifically sanctions the use of the royal family's heraldic symbols. The act also provides the Crown Prince housing and a pension and has been noted as conferring a sort of "quasi restoration" of the throne.  In a May 15th Pobjeda newspaper interview, Prince Nikola cited Article 3 of this law, as the basis for his May 5th re-institution of the Order, which he emphasized was "historically an extremely valuable Montenegrin decoration."" He went on to explain that the order can be awarded to Montenegrin nationals and worthy foreigners on two general grounds: (1), for support and affirmation of Montenegrin independence and the royal tradition of the Petrovic Njegos dynasty, and (2) to those whose "scientific or social work contributed to the development of culture, art and science."  The Order has since been bestowed on a number of high dignitaries internationally. In an April 17th 2016 visit to Rome, HRH Prince Nikola II Petrovic Njegoš met with Pope Francis and other high Vatican officials bestowing the dynastic honor on the Cambodian ambassador, His Highness Prince Sisowath Ravivaddhana Monipong, the Montenegrisn ambassador to the Holy See Veselin Šuković, as well as the U.S. AMbassador to the Holy See Kenneth Francis Hackett, the ambassador of Hungary, HIRH Eduard von Habsburg-Lothringen among several other Vatican officials and Italian nobles. The official Representative of the Royal House and the order is H.E. Giuseppe Tedischi GCDO, who also has the Vatican charge "Addetto di Anticamera di Sua Santità," or Officer of Antechamber of His Holiness.
The Order was the first Montenegrin dynastic and state Order established by Prince Danilo Petrović Njegoš in 1853, as the Order of Danilo I for the Independence of Montenegro in 1852-53. This Decoration is still awarded to prominent champions of the preservation of Montenegrin independence and, as indicated above, for other humanitarian, scientific, artistic and pro-social achievements pursuant to the conditions by which the Order is awarded were defined by Statute.
Alterations were made to the appearance of the original decoration created by Prince Danilo and during the rule of His Majesty King Nikola I Petrović Njegoš the Order underwent two restructures. During the first restructure in 1861, three classes were introduced, while in the second restructure, from 1873, an additional class was added, so that not only is there a star in the 1st class but also a 2nd class with star was introduced. By 1922, the order consisted of five classes: Grand Cross, Grand Officer, Commander, Officer, and knight or Chevalier. More changes occurred and today's five classes are:
Grand Cross I, (Sash and Large Chest Star)--Cavaliere di Grande Croce (1st Class)
Grand Officer II (Neck Cross, Sash, Chest Star)--Grande Uffiale (2nd Class)
Knight Commander III Neck Cross, Chest Star--Commendatore (3rd Class)
Knight IV Chest Cross--Cavaliere (4th Class)
Member V Chest Cross (Black and Silver--Member (5th Class) 
On Saturday June 4, 2005, Cetinje, the old Royal Capital of Montenegro, hosted the first gala ceremony of the Order in the country since 90 years.