Otis Ray Redding, Jr. (September 9, 1941 – December 10, 1967) was an American singer, songwriter, record producer, arranger, and talent scout. He is considered one of the greatest singers in the history of American popular music and a seminal artist in soul music and rhythm and blues. His singing style influenced many other soul artists of the 1960s. During his lifetime, his recordings were produced by Stax Records, based in Memphis, Tennessee.
Born and raised in the US state of Georgia, Redding quit school at age 15 to support his family, working with Little Richard's backing band, the Upsetters, and performing at talent shows for prize money. In 1958, he joined Johnny Jenkins's band, the Pinetoppers, with whom he toured the Southern states as a singer and driver. The person that discovered Otis Redding was James McEachin. James took Otis into the studio and brought the recordings to Al Kavelin who had just had a hit with “Alley-Oop” on Lute Records. Kavelin agreed to release a single and later released another single on Trans-World. The titles of these records were: “Tuff Enuff,” “She’s All Right,” “Gamma Lama,” and “Gettin’ Hip.” James McEachin wrote most of that material but at times collaborated with Otis.” A new book “Dreams to Remember ” an account of Stax Records and Otis Redding. The book tells of Otis Redding’s trip from his home to test the waters in Los Angeles. He worked hard meeting recording industry people and finally was more or less taken under the wing of McEachin who arranged for Redding to record his four sides at the Gold Coin studio in L.A. where several successful artists had recorded. McEachin had shopped the tracks all over the industry with no takers. McEachin was best known for being an actor but initially spent time as a record producer. An unscheduled appearance on a Stax recording session led to a contract and his first single to become a hit, "These Arms of Mine," in 1962. Stax released Redding's debut album, Pain in My Heart, two years later.
Initially popular mainly with African-Americans, Redding later reached a wider American pop music audience. Along with his group, he first played small gigs in the American South. He later performed at the popular Los Angeles night club Whisky a Go Go and toured Europe, performing in London, Paris and other major cities. He also performed at the Monterey Pop Festival in 1967.
Shortly before his death in a plane crash, Redding wrote and recorded his iconic "(Sittin' On) The Dock of the Bay" with Steve Cropper. The song became the first posthumous number-one record on both the Billboard Hot 100 and R&B charts. The album The Dock of the Bay was the first posthumous album to reach number one on the UK Albums Chart.
Redding's premature death devastated Stax. Already on the verge of bankruptcy, the label soon discovered that Atlantic Records owned the rights to his entire song catalog.
Redding received many posthumous accolades, including the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award and induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and the Songwriters Hall of Fame. In addition to "(Sittin' On) The Dock of the Bay," "Respect" and "Try a Little Tenderness" are among his best-known songs.