Progressive music is music that expands stylistic boundaries outwards and subverts the particulars of its genre. Rooted in the idea of a cultural alternative, musical progressiveness embodies a continuous move between explicit and implicit references to genres and strategies derived from various cultural domains, such as European art music, Celtic folk, West Indian, or African. The word "progressive" comes from the basic concept of "progress", which refers to development and growth by accumulation, and is often deployed in numerous music genres such as progressive country, progressive folk, progressive jazz, and (most significantly) progressive rock.
Among art theories, the progressive approach falls between formalism and eclecticism. "Formalism" refers to a preoccupation with established external compositional systems, structural unity, and the autonomy of individual art works. Like formalism, "eclecticism" connotates a predilection toward style synthesis or integration. However, contrary to formalist tendencies, eclecticism foregrounds discontinuities between historical and contemporary styles and electronic media, sometimes referring simultaneously to vastly different musical genres, idioms, and cultural codes. In marketing, "progressive" is used to distinguish a product from "commercial" pop music. Progressive music may also be associated with auteur-stars and concept albums, considered traditional structures of the music industry.
Jazz began to take itself seriously as swing gave way to bebop in the 1940s, but could not maintain its listening audience. Following the economic boom of the mid 1960s, record labels began investing in artists whose ambitions paralleled these earlier attempts in jazz, offering performers limited control over their own content and marketing. This resulted in a brief period in which creative authenticity among musical artists and consumer marketing coincided with each other, a situation that fell into abeyance between the late 1970s and the birth of Internet stars. Beginning in 1967, pop music would be divided by a "progressive pop" and "mass/chart pop" demographic that subsequently gave rise to the "progressive rock" movement, which crystallized the progressive music of earlier artists into a recognizable genre.

