Robin Cardwell Young (born Youngs) is an American television and radio personality. Young was born in Long Island, New York, attended Ithaca College in Ithaca, New York, and has lived and worked in Manhattan, Washington, DC, Los Angeles and Boston. She has been a Boston-based radio and television host since the late 1970s, when she hosted Evening Magazine for WBZ-TV. She is the sister of John Savage.
She began in television as a secretary at Channel 38 in Boston in 1973. In 1975, she went on air as a radio announcer at WBZ (Boston). She made her first television appearance on WBZ-TV's Evening Magazine in 1977. From 1982 to 1983, Young was lead presenter, along with Tom Ellis, for the revamped evening newscasts on WNEV-TV (now WHDH) Channel 7. After one year, she switched her role at the station and began hosting and producing a number of primetime specials under her own production company, Young Visions.
She currently co-hosts National Public Radio's daily news magazine Here and Now along with Jeremy Hobson. The show normally consists of five interview segments with reporters, politicians, artists, authors and experts on a given subject. It is broadcast from noon to 2 pm on WBUR and is distributed by NPR. In July 2013, Here and Now expanded to two hours. The show is produced at WBUR in Boston.
Young has received several Emmy Awards for her television work as well as cable’s Ace award, the Religious Public Relations Council’s Wilbur Award and the National Conference of Christians and Jews Gold Award. She has also received radio’s regional Edward R. Murrow award.
Her documentary, The Los Altos Story, made in association with the Rotary Club of Los Altos, California, won the prestigious George Foster Peabody Award and is now the backbone of a worldwide HIV/AIDS awareness initiative.
As an independent documentary filmmaker, she produced and directed the opening film for Marion Wright Edelman’s White House Conference on Children and followed the rise of the then unknown filmmaker John Singleton in the film Straight From the Hood.