The Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE (, rarely ), founded in 1916 as the Society of Motion Picture Engineers or SMPE, is an international professional association, based in the United States of America, of engineers working in the motion imaging industries. An internationally recognized standards organization, SMPTE has more than 600 Standards, Recommended Practices, and Engineering Guidelines for television production, filmmaking, digital cinema, audio recording, information technology, and medical imaging. In addition to development and publication of technical standard documents, SMPTE publishes the SMPTE Motion Imaging Journal, provides networking opportunities for its members, produces academic conferences and exhibitions, and performs other industry-related functions.
SMPTE Membership is open to any individual or organization with interest in the subject matter.

SMPTE standards documents are copyrighted and may be purchased from the SMPTE website, or other distributors of technical standards. Standard documents may be purchased by the general public. Significant standards promulgated by SMPTE include:
All film and television transmission formats and media, including digital.
Physical interfaces for transmission of television signals and related data (such as SMPTE time code and the Serial Digital Interface) (SDI)
SMPTE color bars
Test card patterns and other diagnostic tools
The Material eXchange Format, or MXF
SMPTE's educational and professional development activities include technical presentations at regular meetings of its local Sections, annual and biennial conferences in the US and Australia and the SMPTE Motion Imaging Journal. The society sponsors many awards, the oldest of which are the SMPTE Progress Medal, the Samuel Warner Memorial Medal, and the David Sarnoff Medal. SMPTE also has a number of student Chapters and sponsors scholarships for college students in the motion imaging disciplines.
Related organizations include
National Television System Committee (NTSC)
Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG)
ITU Radiocommunication Sector (formerly known as the CCIR)
ITU Telecommunication Sector (formerly known as the CCITT)
Digital Video Broadcasting
BBC Research Department
European Broadcasting Union (EBU)

^ The name was changed from Society of Motion Picture Engineers (SMPE) to Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE) in 1950 to embrace the emerging television industry.
^ [1]