Teachers College, Columbia University is the graduate school of education, health and psychology in New York City at Columbia University. Founded in 1887, it has been a Faculty of Columbia University since its affiliation in 1898. Teachers College is also an academic department of the university and its Ph.D degrees are conferred by the Columbia Graduate School of Arts and Sciences. Consistently achieving top rankings, Teachers College alumni and faculty have held prominent positions in academia, government, music, non-profit, healthcare, and social science research. In general, Teachers College has over 90,000 alumni in more than 30 countries. Notable alumni and former faculty include John Dewey, Carl Rogers, Georgia O'Keeffe, Edward Thorndike, Maxine Greene, William Heard Kilpatrick, Donna Shalala, William Schuman (an American composer and former president of the Julliard School), Lee Huan (Premier of the Republic of China), Shirley Chisholm (first black woman elected to the United States Congress), Mary Adelaide Nutting (the world's first professor of nursing), Zhang Boling (founder of Nankai University and the Nankai system of schools), Hamden L. Forkner (founder of FBLA-PBL), E. Gordon Gee (president of West Virginia University and former president of Brown University, Ohio State University, and Vanderbilt University), and Chester Earl Merrow (a U.S. Representative from New Hampshire). Teachers College is the oldest and largest graduate school of education in the United States.
True to its vision of "education writ large," the school offers Master of Arts (M.A.), Master of Education (Ed.M.), Master of Science (M.S.), Doctor of Education (Ed.D.), and Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) degrees in over sixty programs of study in four core areas of expertise: health, education, leadership, and psychology. Less than one-third of students are preparing to become teachers. Graduates go on to pursue careers in psychology, social and behavioral sciences, health and health promotion, educational policy, technology, international and comparative education, as well as education and educational leadership. Although admnistratively independent, Teachers College is represented in Columbia's governance structure and appoints two senators to the Columbia University Senate.
In 2018, Teachers College was ranked #7 among all graduate schools of education by U.S. News & World Report. However, Teachers College has achieved the #1 ranking in the past.