PRI's The World is a global news radio, audio and multi-platform program created by Public Radio International with the goal of bringing international journalism/news that illuminates the world to US listeners. The program originated partly in response to declining investments by US commercial media in international news. It is co-produced by the BBC World Service of the United Kingdom, and Public Radio International and WGBH of the United States.
The World was PRI's first co-production—the company now has a number of productions. It was also the first news co-production of the BBC World Service. For the BBC, The World was conceived as stand-alone program and also as a template for future co-productions which might serve to expand the reach of BBC World Service resources. At its launch, it was the first program dedicated to focusing on providing global news and making the global-local connection for Americans on a daily basis.
According to the PRI website/releases, PRI currently distributes the show to more than 280 public radio stations across the United States. The program reaches more than 2.5 million listeners every week in broadcast alone. It is primarily hosted by Marco Werman at WGBH's studios in Boston, but often includes substitute hosts including Carol Hills and Aaron Schachter when Werman is in the field. Werman, who has been with The World since its inception, hosted the program from 2010 to 2011 while then-host Lisa Mullins was on sabbatical.
The World was the first daily nationally syndicated public radio program to begin podcasting some of its content, notably its coverage of technology. This began with its technology podcast, which began on February 11, 2005, hosted by Clark Boyd. Today, numerous podcasts are available by topical area and entire programs are available via podcast.
As of October 2009, the program also now airs on CBC Radio One in Canada as part of the CBC Radio Overnight lineup.
The theme music was composed by Eric Goldberg.
Portions of the program are repackaged and rebroadcast on the weekly BBC World Service program called Boston Calling.